This file records my thoughts on various IRC- and Yoleaux-related
issues; it does not explain them. Paragraphs are not organised except by
section; the required background varies wildly from paragraph to
paragraph. Take what you read with a pinch of salt.


IRC generally:

Per RFC 2812 §2.2, IRC treats "{}|^" and "[]\~" as equivalent in a
case-insensitive comparison, such as when comparing two nicknames.
Yoleaux does not (yet) respect this. (Fix: replace all instances of
nick.downcase with a special function which does
nick.downcase.tr('{}|^', '[]\~'))

Phenny uses a hand-hacked parser for IRC lines; Yoleaux just uses a
regexp, @@linere, which I pinched from loggy.py's source. This seems
to work well enough: I haven't seen it trip up once yet. Though it
may turn nasty the first time it does.

Yoleaux's flood control allows a message to be sent immediately if no
data has been sent for at least half a second and the data before that
was sent no more than a second ago; otherwise messages are throttled to
a rate of at most once every 1.5 seconds. This is probably too strict:
acrobup seems to manage to send a lot more than that. For now, though,
it's OK.

Another problem with the current flood control is that it's not
prioritised at all. There are two problems with this: if #a has 100
messages queued then someone in #b issues a command, the poor chap in #b
has to wait for all those hundreds of messages to be delivered before
he'll see the answer to his command. The other issue is that you could
cause the bot to ping-timeout like this. One possible solution would be
to make PONGs unbuffered, but then there's a chance that PONGing could
cause us to be booted for flooding, especially with some derpful IRC
software which will remain nameless. (I don't know if this software
actually behaves in this way, but it would not surprise me in the least.)

Solution: PONGs and messages to different channels get to jump the
queue: they get buffered like normal, but they go ahead of existing
messages to other channels, so that those messages have to wait 3
seconds or something.


Encoding:

Yoleaux converts all input strings to UTF-8 before processing them. All
output is clean UTF-8 (or should be, anyway).

Phenny tries UTF-8, then ISO-8859-1, then Windows-1252. This seems to be
necessary because Python's ISO-8859-1-to-Unicode conversion is done by a
table, rather than simply arithmetically as is Ruby's, and doesn't
include conversions for every byte from 128 to 255. As Windows-1252 is
backwards-compatible with ISO-8859-1 with a few additions, I initially
tried UTF-8 then 1252; unfortunately, Ruby uses a table for Windows-1252
conversion, and errors when it encounters a byte that's not in its
table. ISO Latin-1 to UTF-8 conversion is done without regard to whether
each byte is "valid" in the source encoding, and will work on a string
containing any sequence of bytes. You can demonstrate this by running
the following code:

(0..255).each {|n| n.chr.force_encoding('iso-8859-1').encode('utf-8') }
(0..255).each {|n| n.chr.force_encoding('cp1252').encode('utf-8') }

Upshot of all this: Yoleaux tries UTF-8, and if the string is not valid,
it treats it as ISO-8859-1 and transcodes. This could be a problem if
someone uses a Windows-1252 character which doesn't transcode as they
expect, and thus they pass some kind of input they didn't expect to a
command. Given the increasing dominance of UTF-8, and the number of
clients which only offer Latin-1, I don't think this issue is worth
addressing.


Commands, generally:

Prefixing: need to support ``<bot nick>: prefix?'' queries; and
channel-specific (eg. non-global) prefixes would be nice too.

People keep pestering me to support the ``<bot nick>: tell <someone>
<message>'' syntax from Phenny (and Monty before her). If people annoy
me enough about this, I will add it. My desire to keep it as .tell is to
keep the codebase clean and the syntax consistent, and (secondarily) to
avoid sending messages to workers for every single line regardless of
whether it's a command.

Ideas for supporting this in a fairly generic way (so that other
commands can use special invocation syntax like this): at worker
load-time, each command-set gets to "syntax-alias" commands. These
syntax-aliases are passed back to the main process, which allow eg.
``yoleaux: tell'' to be 'rewritten' (as text) so that at command-time it
looks nothing different from a usual call to .tell. Problems: the main
process would receive n messages about the existence of these aliases
for each one, where n is the number of workers. What about reloads? If
the alias syntax has changed, the main process needs to be made aware of
that. What if two command-sets try to grab the same syntax? One will
'win', which is not too different from what happens when two packages
try to get the same command name, except that the namespace-resolution
syntax can be used specify which particular command by that name you
want.

Another solution: leave syntax aliasing to the bot's admin, stored
perhaps in the config file as a dictionary like this:

    aliases:
       "{nick}: tell ${args}": "{prefix}tell ${args}"

This solves the above problems, at the cost of command-set authors not
being able to choose their own syntax; however, given the inherent
problems of this, this is probably for the best. There can still be
collisions, of course, but these are down to the bot owner to resolve.

Another advantage of syntax-aliasing: you could potentially turn yoleaux
into flyingferret <http://www.chiliahedron.com/ferret/> or something
like it:

    aliases:
        "\x01ACTION rolls ${args}\x01": "{prefix}roll ${args}"
        "{nick}: ${question}?": "{prefix}yes-or-no"
      etc.

Related to this is that the bot should support nick aliasing, which is
to say that you should be able to add a nick which will not actually be
the bot's nick, but which it will respond to if a syntax-alias (like
``bot: tell ...'') or an event (``bot!'' / ``bot: ping?'' / etc)
involves the bot's nickname. Use cases for this: For a potential future
phenny-to-yoleaux transition, yoleaux-main should respond to ``phenny:
tell'' as well as ``yoleaux: tell'', for muscle memory's sake;
flyingferret also responds to `ferret'; it's fun.

Even more powerful would be arbitrary regexps for aliasing; but then how
would the aliases get to know the bot's nick / alias-nicks?

How about channel-specific aliases for commands? So, for instance, the
default name of a command could be .random-mlp-episode but in
#reddit-mlp it could be called .randomep (which is a command in their
current channel bot, Fluttershy.) Rationale: A channel about any other
TV series would want .randomep to get an episode of that TV series, not
MLP. Another #reddit-mlp inspired feature would be to attach hooks to
the noted URL for the channel, so that various commands can do things
when a URL is mentioned, like their clever auto-title thing for YouTube
videos.


Specific commands:

"Dirty cloud" commands: .ety, .follows, .gc :site, .gcs :site, .w/.d,
.wa. These commands all scrape raw HTML, and are likely to break without
warning.

"Semi-dirty cloud" commands: .c, .g, .tr, .wik. These commands don't
scrape HTML, but they use unofficial APIs or ones which I suspect could
change or go away without much notice. For instance, .g scrapes the
Location header of a Google search; .tr scrapes the AJAX response of a
translation request.

"Clean cloud" commands: .head, .npl, .title, .tw. These are depressingly
few. Just because they are 'clean cloud' doesn't make them any less
prone to breakage, either: I foresee .tw breaking in the near future as
Twitter makes more changes to its API as part of its ongoing drive
against everything that once made it good.

.u in Phenny and Duxlot uses a pickled UnicodeData object, loaded into
memory; .u in Yoleaux, on the other hand, literally greps over a copy of
the original UnicodeData.txt file. It also always outputs characters in
ascending order of codepoint, so for instance sometimes a combiner will
appear in the list before the character it combines with. (The same
applies to .chars)

.wa scrapes JavaScript source code and extracts JSON. This is perhaps
the worst scraper in the whole of Yoleaux, and I suspect it will be the
first to break. It also parses the HTML of the WA response in order to
extract the title for each pod in the response, something Phenny and
Duxlot weren't able to do.

.npl uses binary floating-point arithmetic, instead of decimals as
Duxlot and Phenny used. Thus, its representation of sub-second values is
probably slightly out. I can't work out how to get a DateTime object to
accept a BigDecimal value without truncating it, though.

.wik makes three HTTP requests for every query: once to Google, once to
get the article category list to see if it's a disambiguation page, and
once to get the HTML source of the first section, using the Wikipedia
mobile view API. That's more than any other command, and it'd be nice to
cut it down. (Can the last two be combined into one somehow?)

When .w breaks the first time, I'll switch it to Wiktionary.

We have .core-eval now. While it is cute, it's a dangerous toy: if
someone manages to get hold of an admin's nick, they can run arbitrary
code as the OS user the bot runs as. Solution: either don't have
.core-eval, which would make debugging significantly less fun; or allow
the bot to start as root then immediately setuid to an unprivileged
user. Still not completely secure, but far better. (sbp also suggests
making the bot run as a Unix socket server that can be used to send
commands in. Not a bad idea ...)


Callbacks:

What happens when callback argument lists change? Right now you're bound
to supporting your old callbacks forever, in case there's one that
hasn't triggered yet ...


Services:

The services module has priority 2, meaning that (for example) if you
define a command called 'title' as a service, it won't override the
'title' in the api package (which has priority 1), and you'll have to
use 'services.title' in order to invoke it.

Need to report "Bad service format" at .add-command time, rather than
waiting for someone to try using it.

Should support importing the old oblique command schema. The format,
though, is mal-designed, and requires HTML scraping. A simple line-based
text format, which "<name> <url>" on each line would have been far
better for this purpose.

The services package is full of race conditions. See the section on
Databases below.


Databases:

I originally envisioned databases as just being marshaled objects of any
kind, stored on disk. Advantage being that it's quite flexible in terms
of what you can do with it. But you have to load the object into memory
before you can do anything with it. It turns out that I'm not using them
for anything other than a key-value store, except in the scheduler,
which already has its own special database code anyway. So you have to
load all the keys and values from disk into memory before you can access
the value associated with a single key. This is inefficient, and it will
only get more so as the bot gets older and databases like the seen-db
get larger.

Solution: switch to cdb. <http://cr.yp.to/cdb.html> There are several
implementations for Ruby. The keys are just strings; the values are
marshaled objects, as they always have been. Problem: requires migration
from the old database format, since it's already 'in production', so to
speak. This is not too tricky.

You can't do anything non-trivial with a database without involving a
risk of race conditions when another worker does something to the same
database simultaneously. Solution: mutexes, using POSIX semaphores. I
could make the main process do this, or make another 'semaphore server'
process which would control access, but this would be tricky to get
right. It could be worth it, though, if POSIX semaphores are as
poorly-implemented as they seem to be at first glance on OS X and
FreeBSD.

How to use POSIX semaphores: before accessing the DB, open a semaphore
by the name of ``/yoleaux/db/<db-name>'' and wait on it. Then do what
you need to do and finally post to the semaphore.

Simple reads don't need a semaphore, because database rewrites are
atomic. Read-then-writes do, for obvious reasons. Solution:
db(:xyzzy).transaction {|xyzzy| ... }, which holds the mutex for the
entire block and ensures its release at the end.

The services module is already race-condition--prone. Worst case there,
you have to type a special command more than once to get it to work.
cdb + DB transactions would fix this. (Neither without the other.)

The alternative to all this is SQLite, which is overkill.


Big projects:

While I don't think Yoleaux would ever be a GSoC project, here are the
sorts of things I would submit as proposals if I were going to make it
one (that is, projects which (a): have specific, attainable, desirable
goals which leave enough room for design invention by the person who
takes on the project; (b): involve a lot of work; and (c): I have no
intention of doing myself):

Allow Yoleaux to speak protocols other than IRC, using a 'protocol
handler' mechanism like Hubot's. I pestered sbp to support this in
Duxlot, but he resisted. Irony of ironies, I didn't support this in
Yoleaux either, and now the IRC-speaking code is all tangled up in the
process-management code, just like it was for Duxlot. There are a number
of challenges associated with doing this, which are responsible for sbp
being put off doing it in Duxlot. They are out of the scope of this
document but if someone wished to attempt this, I would be happy to
discuss these problems with them

A web interface to Yoleaux configuration. Ideally one could tack this on
to `yoleaux create' in such a way that it would pop open your web
browser on a form that would allow you to configure the bot. Such a
thing should be a self-contained Sinatra (or similar) app, in one file,
not involving any external assets.


Miscellaneous:

Everything can be filed under "Miscellaneous". -- George Bernard Shaw

The existence of this file is inspired by djb's THOUGHTS file from qmail.
Would that Yoleaux were such a piece of artistry!

If Phenny is a fair maiden, and Duxlot is a brave knight, what is
Yoleaux? My initial thought, which is completely irrelevant to the
existing theme of mediæval ideas: Yoleaux is a cool French teenager who
lives in the suburbs of Paris and drives a white Peugeot, constantly
playing rock music (whose lyrics are English, which he does not
understand) far too loud through its stereo.

